---
layout: post
title:  "CRC stuff"
date:   2015-09-15 21:25:00
categories: programming
---

<https://groups.google.com/d/topic/golang-nuts/6HAJOaJOT9c/discussion>

    Date: Wed, 12 Nov 2014 02:04:03 -0800 (PST)
    From: Nick Patavalis <nick.pa...@gmail.com>
    To: golang-nuts@googlegroups.com
    Subject: Re: CRC32 implementation.
  
Maybe this goes a bit off-topic, but anyway...

In CRC calculations (regardless of bit-length), apart from the
polynomial used, other factors also play a role in the calculated
result. Namely:

1. The bit ordering
2. The initial CRC register value
3. The final XOR value (if any)

(1) has to do with what you consider the most significant *bit* in
each byte / word to be. That is, which bit in the CRC word corresponds
to the X^0 term. The most usual way to calculate a CRC (what most
protocols use) is in bit-reversed order: Bit-31 (for a CRC-32)
corresponds to the X^0 term. This has to do with the fact that, often,
hardware emits bytes / words LSBit-first, and you want the CRC to be
transmitted highest order factor first, and to have neighboring
factors kept together. Naturally this is *not* universal: The are
protocols that use CRCs in non-bit-reversed mode.

(2) has to do with what value in the CRC register you start the
calculation with. Vanila CRC says it should be 0x0 (the obvious
choice). Most protocols, though, use an all-ones value, as it protects
an initial streak of zeros in the message better.

(3) has to do with whether you XOR the final calculated CRC value with
something (other than 0) or not. Again all ones is the most common
case (protects final zero-parts of the message) but not universal.

The CRC32 implementation in the standard library, uses the IEEE
polynomial, in bit-reversed order, with initial value 0xFFFFFFFF and
final XOR value 0xFFFFFFFF. It is adequate for every protocol that
uses the IEEE polynomial *and* the same calculation same parameters.

Recently I needed a CRC-16 implementation. In the 16-bit case there is
a myriad (ok, maybe myriad is an exaggeration, but certainly many) of
legacy / proprietary protocols that do CRC calculations in almost
every conceivable way. So I needed something a bit more general. I
based my code on crc32.go of the standard lib. If you wish you can see
the result here:

> <https://github.com/npat-efault/crc16/?

In it you will see how the issues mentioned are reflected in the code
(in the CRC16 case, which is not very different that the CRC32 one).

/npat
